For the next session is Maya Shavin.
She is very popular speaker for Vue community.
I have follow her for many many conferences.
Many of her is about testing.
If you like about testing or unit testing or
end-to-end testing, Playwright, you have to
follow Maya Shavin.
I am the one that follow her for many conference.
Besides from testing, she is one of the popular
contributor of Vue community.
Maya Shavin really want to join our event.
She really want to speak in live session, but
she is unavailable.
But she try to make the pre-record for us.
Especially this session is the new topic,
the new session from Maya Shavin.
We are the first event that can watch
Maya Shavin session.
So please welcome Maya Shavin!
Hey.
Welcome to my talk.
I'm really sad, what a pity that I'm not there
in persons.
But welp…
I hope next time we will see each other in person.
Meanwhile, hope you enjoy the first edition of
Vue.js Conf Thailand and my talk.
Let's talk about testing, shall we?
First and foremost, my name is Maya Shavin and
I'm a senior software engineer at Microsoft and
also an accessibility champ in my group.
We oversees accessibility compliance and trying
to provide best practices and guideline to help
developer comply with accessibility during their
development before release.
I'm also Cloudinary ambassador, Vue.js Israel
organizer, and a Google Developer Expert on Vue
on web technologies.
You can follow me on mayashavin on Twitter,
LinkedIn or Facebook or visit my website at
mayashavin.com where I like to talk and write
about all the experiments and what I learn
during my journey in high-tech.
In addition, I'm currently the mom of 4 kids,
which is actually 3 and a +1.
My latest kid is about 1½ month,
so I'm still in maternity leave.
But hey, it's fun to be back to talk about
things that I'm passionate about.
I'm also an illustrator in free time and I am
a book author, which yeah, this is my book,
Learning Vue.
I'm so excited to have this book released
this year.
If you are interested in learning Vue with
TypeScript, check my book out.
I hope you enjoy it.
That's it about myself.
Let's go back to our main topic today.
First and foremost, let's talk about component
testing.
In a frontend context, or we can say frontend
component testing.
So what is frontend component testing?
In the sense of normal development and
especially for backend, component testing is
like modular testing or we can call it like
unit testing.
But for frontend, it's a bit different.
For frontend component testing, it means that
we have to validate the GUI element are
functional as expected.
GUI element means graphic user interface
element, which we validate also the style,
the class, the hooks, the component props,
the data flow, the interaction within the
component with other components and with user.
When we talk about graphical user interface
element or UI, we are talking about validate
appearance, how it looks, how it functions,
not just the functional testing.
Frontend component testing means we validate
how the component looks and appear to the end
user on the browser and how it functions or
interact with the user or with other components
under the same parent or with its children
components.
Once you validate things like this, you also
need to validate the consistency or regression
test between change, between feature added,
remove, between bug fixes on different device,
on different browser, and so on.
For this, we divide frontend component testing
into two biggest aspect.
The first one is behavior or functional testing
including how the component functions.
So hooks, how it process data, how it take the
interaction of user and reply to the user
and so on.
The other aspect of frontend component testing
is visual UI testing or UI testing.
It including how the component appear on the
browser to the client, to the end user.
How it looks, color, image, styling, layout,
and so on.
We also need to validate the consistency of
the look whenever we add a new feature, we add
a new button, so on and so forth.
Not just test how it appear.
We test how it appears, how it looks on
different device, on different browser, on
different operation system.
And this is our main topic of today, visual
testing or UI testing.
But hold on a minute.
We know the functional component testing
including visual testing or UI testing.
Remember this pyramid, which we have unit test,
integration test, and end-to-end test.
So where this visual testing or functional
component test of a frontend component testing
fall into?
You can say it fall into unit testing or can
fall into end-to-end testing.
It makes more sense with end-to-end testing
because in end-to-end, you actually simulate
the user actual flow on the actual browser.
But we also can have visual testing on unit
test by snapshot comparison, for example.
So,
In this talk, we're going to explore
what the difference between visual testing
in unit test and end-to-end test and how
we can combine these two in the same testing
system for visual testing of a component.
Before we move on, we're going to take a look
on the demo component.
In this demo, we're going to use a search
component from a demo app that is Pizza Store.
It has only three features: receive the search
term and synchronize the search according to
what the user type and of course, it will
emit the search term, the new search term
and the filter item that has within,
beginning with, by this, the new search term.
Okay, simple.
You can implement it in any way in Vue
application, in a Vue component, but these
are the main features that we're going to
test on.
Okay.
The first thing we're going to look at is
visual testing on unit test with Vitest.
Okay.
So, let's recap what is Vitest.
Vitest is a test runner that is super
lightweight, super fast, and it's a headless
test runner in a Node.js environment.
It was created for Vite projects, which is
JavaScript projects, and mainly used for
unit test, integration test that's written
in Node.js.
And it's not only for Node.js.
We can extend it to work with browser,
mimicking the browser and configure it with
other package to make sure that Vitest can
run on specific framework application,
such as Vue.
So for Vue, when you install Vitest, you
need to install also test-utils, Vue Test
Utils or the package for testing library
in Vue in order to get the set of APIs
for assertions, a component in Vue and also
be able to get a sets of methods that help
you to render a component in a Vue
environment with all the capability that
you needed for running the test successfully.
Okay.
So let's talk about visual testing with
Vitest.
So for Vitest, like I said, it's a very
generic test runner, so we won't have any
browser support here because we are using
the Node environment.
For browser environment, well, because it's
in Node environment by default, when you run
a test on a component which is for front-end,
for browser, you need to have extra
implementation for DOM API and HTML
standards, such as jsdom or happy-dom.
These package will provide the APIs like
query selector, like to have attribute and
query by role and so on, so that you can
assert it according to the DOM API or even
window object, for example.
It does have visual testing by default using
snapshot comparison with the function
toMatchSnapshot, but very limited and why,
we're going to take a look in the next slide.
For visual testing with Vitest, since it's
a generic test runner for unit test and
integration test, you cannot test per device,
you cannot test per browser, and you cannot
add behavior, accessibility testing.
You can test the ARIA standard, but for
anything that require navigation, user
interaction, actual user interaction for
accessibility, this doesn't work.
Okay.
Let's take a look how we set it up and we
try our test.
So, first of all, you need to set up the
environment, jsdom or happy-dom, whatever
you feel like.
And then you can just use the function,
just mount it.
mount the component at the wrapper and then
expects the mounted component to match the
snapshot.
That's it.
We have this visual testing for in Vitest
implemented.
In the first run, it would generate the
snapshot in the locations that we define in
the vitest.config for snapshot.
And then you can open the snapshot and then
whenever run the second run, it would try
to match the snapshot with the new snapshot
and see whether it's the same.
Okay.
So we can take a look at the snapshot and
the reason why I say it's limited because
the snapshots is actually virtual node.
It's mean node JavaScript.
And you can see here that is not something
that you can look and understand straight
away what is this component.
And whenever you make a change, let's say I
changed the label to search label, the
snapshot will fail.
In order to make sure that the snapshot
updated, we have another command called
vitest -u.
And then when you run this, it will run
like the normal vitest run, but it will
automatically update the snapshot to the
latest code.
And this is something pretty dangerous
because when you do something like that, it
kind of erase on the idea of snapshot
testing because you can just update the
snapshot and you never find the bugs.
You never see what went wrong and what can
be wrong.
And since it's hard to read, it's not very
maintainable or reliable because no one can
understand what they written in the
snapshot except for tree and object and so
on.
But the more the bigger component, the
harder to understand it.
Okay.
So next, so that is visual testing in unit
test in Vitest.
What can we do with other end-to-end test
runner such as Playwright for visual
testing?
Let's take a quick look about it.
So Playwright as the test runner is the
browser-based runner for end-to-end test in
web application.
So it's pretty freaking fast and isolated
and it have component testing features that
is specifically for testing component, not
testing the whole application or whole
page.
And it cross language.
So if your project have two different
language, one for backend, one for
frontend, using Playwright can be very
beneficial for your application management.
Okay.
So let's take a look how we enable visual
testing in Playwright.
First, we using component testing.
So we go to install something called
@playwright/experimental-ct-vue package
for component testing.
And when we install it, it will auto
generate for us Playwright config
specifically for component testing with all
the browser, the basic browser we want to
test.
And then we can go to the spec like test
file, import the test, expect from this
package and write the test as normal
because we in Playwright, we can write
JSX here.
And then we can check use the function
screenshot and we pass the path where do
we want or what format and what name of the
screenshot they want to generate under.
And we can also use full page, but for
component, full page will not do anything
much.
In other, we can use the screenshot
function of page or method of page.
Similar syntax, we can pass the path and we
can enable full page to make sure they
capture the whole page as this is in the
browser.
And we can run it.
And this is how we run the test.
Okay.
Now if you look at the screenshot,
so for component screenshot is only the
component.
But for the page it's display the whole
page.
So really depends on how you want to do it.
With this screenshot, you can actually do
manual, look at this and see whether it's
render correctly, because render as is,
so you can really see look and feel,
what you see what you get.
And you can also upload it to a cloud,
integrate with the third party smart tool
to do comparison between the two screenshot
and see which one doesn't match in the
automation process.
So we also have full accessibility testing
with additional package as core Playwright.
And it sounds cool, right?
But that's not the point of this talk.
Here comes the next question.
So that stay along.
Obviously, Vitest have more limited
Playwright have a lot more advantage
towards end-to-end test or visual testing
for component since it have component
testing also.
But the question in this talk is, can we
have the similar power of Playwright in
Vitest to support full browser visual
testing?
Well, the answer is yes, kind of.
With Vitest browser mode, you can have
this together in the same Vitest, in the
same test runner.
How we going to do it, especially with
Playwright?
What we do, we install the package called
@vitest/browser.
This package will enable the browser
features, more features for Vitest.
And then, we write a command
npx vitest init browser and it will
walk it through the configuration
automatically to set up the environmental
configuration ready and even the sample
test ready for browser mode.
And yes, of course, we can choose Vue,
we can choose another browser, Chromium,
or we can choose another browser provider,
not just Playwright, can WebDriverIO or
something.
In this talk, we're going to use
Playwright.
And then, that's not it, we need to do
extra setup.
Because now in our application, we have
unit test and we have browser test.
And this doesn't really work together
because each test, the test runner need
to know different mode, different
configuration in order to run the test
correctly and not throw error.
So we need to provide different test
configuration.
Like in here, you can see one is for
unit test where I set the environment
to be jsdom and pass the include
directory of files that's meant to be
for unit test.
And for browser test, I have the object
browser where I enable the browser and
pass the target browser, the provider,
and other options of the provider inside
the configuration.
And with that, I add another command to
point the command Vitest when to run
the Vitest.
With Vitest, it will use this workspace
file instead of the normal
vitest.config file.
And with that, let's go to do a quick
demo.
Okay
So in this demo, this is the search box.
And I already have…
The component.
And now I already have the end-to-end test
right here.
So we can copy it and move it to browser.
And now, instead of using the component
testing view package, we can just use
the normal Vitest package.
Now we're going to update the route path
to the component.
And because we are in Vitest and not in
Playwright native environment for writing
the test, we cannot use JSX.
Instead, we use the normal mount and we do
the prop.
And of course, this will not be available
here because it's not on the server and
it's not a Playwright going through Vitest.
So instead of mount, we using render
function from Vitest browser view.
And then locator, some of the native
function of Playwright will not present in
the browser mode of Vitest yet.
So instead of locator, we will do
getByTestID and instead of ID, we put the
test ID which is the search input.
And here we getByText where we get the text
of the component by passing the text of
the label.
And we keep everything the same except for
component doesn't have a screenshot.
Instead, we will use the element where we
take the screenshot of that element,
the input element.
And the page not here.
So instead, we will use the page from
context of Vitest browser context package.
And we will just pass element because this
one work and since a label is the locator,
it's always true and we will return
the element and we can do the actual
element to be truthy.
And to have value, element is a locator
and not an element.
So we also need to use the same function
element to get that.
And similarly, we don't need this test.
Just for the purpose here.
So now let's run the test.
Once I run the test, you can see here.
It will run the test.
It run the unit test and then it start
running the browser test.
And you can see the test and once it's
done, it shows us a GUI where we can see
all the passing running and each of the
test will have the label to tell us
exactly whether it's the unit test or
the browser test.
And you can see the UI, can interact it,
can check in different device and we also
have a dashboard.
Awesome, right?
And that's it.
We have both visual testing together with
unit testing for a component in Vitest
with the help of Playwright very little
and we don't need to install the whole
Playwright standalone.
It do everything for us.
Cool.
Before we finish, what we expected for
Vitest browser mode with Playwright?
Well, the pros are obviously we have
everything in one place, everything.
And we can also actually testing our
component in the state of the isolated
mode with the actual browser, with actual
UI and with actual data.
And we can have one UI to see all the
report on the status of the test.
And we don't need to run different command
and different mode for different type
of testing.
And of course, the biggest disadvantage of
the mode at the moment is that it's in
preview mode.
So some of the functionality is not
there yet.
But I'm sure it will be there very soon
and I'm sure that Vitest team is working
very hard on that.
But meanwhile, check it out.
The browser mode, you may not need
component utility testing anymore.
Instead, you can use unit test plus
component testing with Vitest browser mode
and Playwright.
And remember, test what a component does,
not how it does it.
And thank you.
I hope you enjoy my talk.
If you have any questions, feel free to
talk to me.
I will be happy to answer any questions
and see if I can help you in any case.
And have a great day and enjoy
the conference.